---
layout: default
title: Research
categories: misc
research: true
---
# Overview
Soil, much like living organisms, has evolved over millions of years, developing distinctive mechanical and transport properties shaped by nature’s design. Its microscopic structure governs critical functions such as soil stability, carbon sequestration, groundwater storage, and nutrient delivery. Soil microstructure and composition follow evolutionary design rules, optimizing porosity and functionality in response to persistent natural forces. By decoding these rules, particularly by understanding the emergence of exotic properties through multiscale interactions among heterogeneous components, we can engineer a new class of adaptive, sustainable matter. The ultimate goal is to create truly circular materials with programmed functionalities, and we are pursuing three complementary directions to achieve this.

<b> How do complex soil systems possess simple structure-property rules?</b><br>
Soil materials often follow universal structure–property relationships, in spite of their complexities. By deconstructing the multiscale mechanics of natural soils through minimally complex laboratory analogs, we uncover material-control on macroscale mechanics. Viewing challenges in soil mechanics through the lens of soft matter physics has provided new insights into longstanding unsolved questions. For example, we showed that the timescales embedded in the rearrangement dynamics of cohesive and frictional constituents dictate brittle-to-ductile failure transition in soft soil systems. We validated this framework by applying it to natural flows, demonstrating that the proposed material deformation mechanism can precisely differentiate between sand-rich and clay-rich soil slurry flows, reconciling previous disagreements in the literature. Extending the framework to characterize material haptic properties further reveals how the unique balance of cohesive, frictional, and viscous elements in baseball rubbing mud, a naturally harvested material, produces a soft substance with unusual gripping properties, used in Major League Baseball as a de-glossing material.
<ul>
    <li><u>Shravan Pradeep</u>, Xiangyu Chen, Ali Seiphoori, David R Vann, Paulo E Arratia, Douglas J Jerolmack, <a href="https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2413514121">Soft matter mechanics of baseball's rubbing mud</a>, <i>PNAS</i> (2024).</li>
    <li><u>Shravan Pradeep</u>, Paulo E. Arratia, Douglas J. Jerolmack, <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-024-51357-y">Origins of complexity in rheology of Soft Earth suspensions</a>, <i>Nature Communications</i> (2024).</li>
    <li>Robert Kostynick<sup>&#182;</sup>, Hadis Matinpour<sup>&#182;</sup>, <u>Shravan Pradeep</u><sup>&#182;</sup>, Thomas Dunne, Sarah Haber, Alban Sauret, Eckart Meiburg, Paulo E Arratia, and Douglas J Jerolmack, <a href="https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2209109119">Rheology of debris flows controlled by the distance from jamming</a>, <i>PNAS</i> (2022).</li>
</ul>  

<b>How does microscopic surface details tune macroscale soft mechanics?</b><br>
Engineering complex materials with programmable mechanical properties is the central challenge in the field of soft matter mechanics. We addressed this challenge by developing model experimental systems and characterization tools to investigate how colloidal surface anisotropy governs the flow and mechanical properties of dense suspensions. By synthesizing polymer-based colloids with tunable surface roughness and employing a custom-built confocal–rheometer, we directly linked microscale structure to macroscopic mechanics. This work produced the first experimental three-dimensional sheared contact networks in dense suspensions, revealing how nearest-neighbor interactions dictate shear thickening and elasticity. These findings demonstrated that colloidal roughness is a powerful design parameter, enabling the engineering of flow behavior and shock-absorbing properties in shear-thickening fluids. More broadly, by connecting the elasticity of dense colloidal suspensions to their thermal structure at jamming, we bridged the mechanics of colloidal systems with those of granular materials. Together, these studies established design principles for engineering functional suspensions, with surface anisotropy–controlled thickening and shock absorption applications.
<ul>
    <li><u>Shravan Pradeep</u>, Alan Wessel, and Lilian C Hsiao, <a href="https://sor.scitation.org/doi/full/10.1122/8.0000424">Hydrodynamic origin for the suspension viscoelasticity in rough colloids</a>, <i>Journal of Rheology</i> (2022).</li>
    <li> <u>Shravan Pradeep</u>, Mohammad Nabizadeh, Alan R Jacob, Safa Jamali, and Lilian C Hsiao, <a href="https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.158002">Jamming distance dictates colloidal shear thickening</a>, <i>Physical Review Letters</i> (2021).</li>
    <li><u>Shravan Pradeep</u>, Lilian C Hsiao, <a href="https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2020/sm/d0sm00072h">Contact criterion in suspensions of smooth and rough colloids”</a>, <i>Soft Matter</i> (2020).</li>
</ul>

<b>How do bacterial interactions with soft particles give rise to emergent behavior?</b> <br>
This question lies at the core of transport in soil, microplastic mixing in oceans, fermentation bioreactors, and wastewater treatment processes. Using colloidal poly(styrene) tracers dispersed in E. coli suspensions as model soft-living dynamics systems, we decoupled the effects of bacterial concentration on tracer dispersal. We further discovered the emergence of bioconvection as a function of bacterial concentration, which significantly enhances mixing. These findings provide new insights into living matter–mediated transport across both natural and industrial environments.
<ul>
    <li>Nandish Vora<sup>&#182;</sup>, <u>Shravan Pradeep</u><sup>&#182;</sup>, Ranjiangshang Ran, Paulo Arratia, "Stretching field statistics in time-periodic flows with dilute bacterial suspensions", <i>In Preparation</i>.</li>
    <li>Bryan O. Torres Maldonado, <u>Shravan Pradeep</u>, Ranjiangshang Ran, Douglas Jerolmack, Paulo E. Arratia, <a href="https://www-cambridge-org.proxy.library.upenn.edu/core/journals/journal-of-fluid-mechanics/article/sedimentation-dynamics-of-passive-particles-in-dilute-bacterial-suspensions-emergence-of-bioconvection/86E12EF2BFB361B338D90C9EA3AC9E13">Sedimentation dynamics of passive particles in dilute bacterial suspensions: emergence of bioconvection</a>, <i>Journal of Fluid Mechanics</i>,  (2024).</li>
    <li>Bryan O. Torres Maldonado, Ranjiangshang Ran, K. Lawrence Galloway, Quentin Brosseau, <u>Shravan Pradeep</u>, Paulo E. Arratia, <a href="https://pubs.aip.org/aip/pof/article/34/11/113305/2847148/Phase-separation-during-sedimentation-of-dilute">Phase-separation during sedimentation of dilute bacterial suspensions</a>, <i>Physics of Fluids</i>,  (2022).</li>
</ul>


The ultimate goal is to deepen understanding of soil structure by reimagining it as a complex soft material and translating these insights into precision engineering applications for meta-soil development, geomimetic materials, and earth-inspired processes.